content/blogs/java/11-to-17.md, before:

---
draft: false
weight: 10
showAuthor: true
showWordCount: true
showReadingTime: true
---
# Things changed from Java 11 - 17

## Java 12

## Java 13

## Java 14

### Switch Expression

Below are the changes in the `switch` construct introduced in Java 14, formalized by JEP 361, JEP-354, and JEP-325. The new **Switch Expression** addresses three main issues with the traditional `switch` statement: verbosity, variable scope issues, and being limited to a statement.

#### 1. Its unnecessarily verbose and error prone

The traditional `switch` required `break` statements, leading to repetitive code and the potential for fall-through errors if a `break` was missed.

- **Problem Example (Traditional Switch Statement):**
    
    ```java
    switch (day) {
        case MONDAY:
        case FRIDAY:
        case SUNDAY:
            System.out.println(6);
            break;
        case TUESDAY:
            System.out.println(7);
            break;
        case THURSDAY:
        case SATURDAY:
            System.out.println(8);
            break;
        case WEDNESDAY:
            System.out.println(9);
            break;
    }
    ```
    

- **Solution (Switch Expression with `->`):**
    
    The new syntax uses `case L ->`, which eliminates the need for an explicit `break` and allows multiple labels to be grouped.
    
    ```java
    switch (weekDay) {
        case MONDAY, FRIDAY, SUNDAY -> System.out.println(6);
        case TUESDAY                -> System.out.println(7);
        case THURSDAY, SATURDAY     -> System.out.println(8);
        case WEDNESDAY              -> System.out.println(9);
    }
    ```
    

#### 2. Scope of variable within Switch

A variable declared in one `case` block in the traditional `switch` is scoped to the entire `switch` block, causing errors if the same variable name is used in another arm.

- Problem Example (Variable Scope):
    
    ```java
    switch (day) {
        case MONDAY:
        case TUESDAY:
            int temp = ...;     
            break;
        case WEDNESDAY:
        case THURSDAY:
            int temp = ...;    // Can't call this variable 'temp'
            break;
        default:
            int temp = ...;    // Can't call this variable 'temp'
    }
    ```
    
    Error: Variable 'temp' is already defined in the scope
    
- **Workaround:** The common workaround was declaring a variable outside the `switch` and assigning values inside each `case`.
    
    ```java
    int temp;
    switch (day) {
        case MONDAY:
        case FRIDAY:
        case SUNDAY:
            temp = 6;
            break;
        case TUESDAY:
            temp = 7;
            break;
        case THURSDAY:
        case SATURDAY:
            temp = 8;
            break;
        case WEDNESDAY:
            temp = 9;
            break;
        default:
            throw new IllegalStateException("Wat: " + day);
    }
    ```
    
- **Solution: Using `yield` or Expression Form:** The new switch can return a value, naturally handling scope.
    - **Using `yield` (with `:`):** The `yield` keyword is used to produce a value from the `switch` expression.
    
    ```java
    Integer temp = switch (weekDay) {
                case MONDAY, FRIDAY, SUNDAY: 
                    yield 6;
                case TUESDAY:
                    yield 7;
                case THURSDAY, SATURDAY:
                    yield 8;
                case WEDNESDAY:
                    yield 9;
            };
    ```
    
    - **Using `->` (as expression):** This concise syntax implicitly yields the result.
    
    ```java
    Integer temp = switch (weekDay) {
                case MONDAY, FRIDAY, SUNDAY -> 6;
                case TUESDAY                -> 7;
                case THURSDAY, SATURDAY     -> 8;
                case WEDNESDAY              -> 9;
            };
    ```
    

#### 3. Limited to a statement not expression

The traditional `switch` was limited to a statement and could not compute and return a single value directly.

- **As Statement (Original):**
    
    ```java
    int numLetters;
    switch (day) {
        case MONDAY:
        case FRIDAY:
        case SUNDAY:
            numLetters = 6;
            System.out.println(6);
            break;
        case TUESDAY:
            numLetters = 7;
            System.out.println(6);
            break;
        case THURSDAY:
        case SATURDAY:
            numLetters = 8;
            System.out.println(6);
            break;
        case WEDNESDAY:
            numLetters = 9;
            System.out.println(6);
            break;
        default:
            throw new IllegalStateException("Wat: " + day);
    }
    ```
    
- **As Expression (New Feature):** The `switch` can now be used as an expression, where its result can be directly used in a statement like `System.out.println()`.
    
    ```java
    System.out.println(
            switch (weekDay) {
                case MONDAY, FRIDAY, SUNDAY -> 6;
                case TUESDAY -> 7;
                case THURSDAY, SATURDAY -> 8;
                case WEDNESDAY -> 9;
            }
    );
    ```

#### Some important links

| JEP | Link |
| --- | --- |
| **JEP-354** | [https://openjdk.org/jeps/354](https://openjdk.org/jeps/354) |
| **JEP-325** | [https://openjdk.org/jeps/325](https://openjdk.org/jeps/325) |
| **JEP 361** | [https://openjdk.org/jeps/361](https://openjdk.org/jeps/361) |


## Java 15

## Java 16

## Java 17

Commit message:

Add sections for Java 15, 16, and 17; update Switch Expressions preview in Java 12

content/blogs/java/11-to-17.md, after:

---
draft: false
weight: 10
showAuthor: true
showWordCount: true
showReadingTime: true
title: Things changed from Java 11 - 17
---
# Things changed from Java 11 - 17

## Java 12
### Switch Expressions (Preview)  [JEP 325](https://openjdk.org/jeps/325)

More on this in [`Switch Expression`](#switch-expression)

## Java 13

## Java 14

### Switch Expression

Below are the changes in the `switch` construct introduced in Java 14, formalized by JEP 361, JEP-354, and JEP-325. The new **Switch Expression** addresses three main issues with the traditional `switch` statement: verbosity, variable scope issues, and being limited to a statement.

#### 1. Its unnecessarily verbose and error prone

The traditional `switch` required `break` statements, leading to repetitive code and the potential for fall-through errors if a `break` was missed.

- **Problem Example (Traditional Switch Statement):**
    
    ```java
    switch (day) {
        case MONDAY:
        case FRIDAY:
        case SUNDAY:
            System.out.println(6);
            break;
        case TUESDAY:
            System.out.println(7);
            break;
        case THURSDAY:
        case SATURDAY:
            System.out.println(8);
            break;
        case WEDNESDAY:
            System.out.println(9);
            break;
    }
    ```
    

- **Solution (Switch Expression with `->`):**
    
    The new syntax uses `case L ->`, which eliminates the need for an explicit `break` and allows multiple labels to be grouped.
    
    ```java
    switch (weekDay) {
        case MONDAY, FRIDAY, SUNDAY -> System.out.println(6);
        case TUESDAY                -> System.out.println(7);
        case THURSDAY, SATURDAY     -> System.out.println(8);
        case WEDNESDAY              -> System.out.println(9);
    }
    ```
    

#### 2. Scope of variable within Switch

A variable declared in one `case` block in the traditional `switch` is scoped to the entire `switch` block, causing errors if the same variable name is used in another arm.

- Problem Example (Variable Scope):
    
    ```java
    switch (day) {
        case MONDAY:
        case TUESDAY:
            int temp = ...;     
            break;
        case WEDNESDAY:
        case THURSDAY:
            int temp = ...;    // Can't call this variable 'temp'
            break;
        default:
            int temp = ...;    // Can't call this variable 'temp'
    }
    ```
    
    Error: Variable 'temp' is already defined in the scope
    
- **Workaround:** The common workaround was declaring a variable outside the `switch` and assigning values inside each `case`.
    
    ```java
    int temp;
    switch (day) {
        case MONDAY:
        case FRIDAY:
        case SUNDAY:
            temp = 6;
            break;
        case TUESDAY:
            temp = 7;
            break;
        case THURSDAY:
        case SATURDAY:
            temp = 8;
            break;
        case WEDNESDAY:
            temp = 9;
            break;
        default:
            throw new IllegalStateException("Wat: " + day);
    }
    ```
    
- **Solution: Using `yield` or Expression Form:** The new switch can return a value, naturally handling scope.
    - **Using `yield` (with `:`):** The `yield` keyword is used to produce a value from the `switch` expression.
    
    ```java
    Integer temp = switch (weekDay) {
                case MONDAY, FRIDAY, SUNDAY: 
                    yield 6;
                case TUESDAY:
                    yield 7;
                case THURSDAY, SATURDAY:
                    yield 8;
                case WEDNESDAY:
                    yield 9;
            };
    ```
    
    - **Using `->` (as expression):** This concise syntax implicitly yields the result.
    
    ```java
    Integer temp = switch (weekDay) {
                case MONDAY, FRIDAY, SUNDAY -> 6;
                case TUESDAY                -> 7;
                case THURSDAY, SATURDAY     -> 8;
                case WEDNESDAY              -> 9;
            };
    ```
    

#### 3. Limited to a statement not expression

The traditional `switch` was limited to a statement and could not compute and return a single value directly.

- **As Statement (Original):**
    
    ```java
    int numLetters;
    switch (day) {
        case MONDAY:
        case FRIDAY:
        case SUNDAY:
            numLetters = 6;
            System.out.println(6);
            break;
        case TUESDAY:
            numLetters = 7;
            System.out.println(6);
            break;
        case THURSDAY:
        case SATURDAY:
            numLetters = 8;
            System.out.println(6);
            break;
        case WEDNESDAY:
            numLetters = 9;
            System.out.println(6);
            break;
        default:
            throw new IllegalStateException("Wat: " + day);
    }
    ```
    
- **As Expression (New Feature):** The `switch` can now be used as an expression, where its result can be directly used in a statement like `System.out.println()`.
    
    ```java
    System.out.println(
            switch (weekDay) {
                case MONDAY, FRIDAY, SUNDAY -> 6;
                case TUESDAY -> 7;
                case THURSDAY, SATURDAY -> 8;
                case WEDNESDAY -> 9;
            }
    );
    ```

## Java 15

## Java 16

## Java 17

#### Some important links

| JEP | Link |
| --- | --- |
| **JEP-354** | [https://openjdk.org/jeps/354](https://openjdk.org/jeps/354) |
| **JEP-325** | [https://openjdk.org/jeps/325](https://openjdk.org/jeps/325) |
| **JEP 361** | [https://openjdk.org/jeps/361](https://openjdk.org/jeps/361) |
